---
title: A Farewell Message From Dr. Fauci
description: "Wipe away your tears, poor fearful serfs!"
date: '2022-07-20 15:59:00 +0000'

tags:
- covid19
---

Greetings, worshipers of me, The Science™!  I'm sure you're all
feeling very sad and anxious about my impending retirement as the head
government dispenser of mask and vaccine propaganda.  For the last 2.5
years, I've kept you busy changing from one performative display of
virtue to another, in order to keep up with the ever-changing
Science™.  You're probably wondering, "How ever will I be able to live
my life without Dr. Fauci's daily advice?" But don't worry!  I'll
still be around to help my replacement fill your fearful little brains
with super-sciency scientific guidance.

<!--more-->

And don't worry about my no longer being the highest paid employee of
the federal government, and that I'll be forced to live in a cardboard box under
a freeway overpass.  I'll still have a nice fat pension, and all those
royalties from vaccine and virus patents, like the patents I helped
Moderna get by giving them tons of money and contracts.

Plus I'm thinking of writing my memoir (draft title: *How I Saved the
World From the Worst Disease Ever*), which I hope will get a huge
Obama-sized advance.

I'm also looking forward to regular TV appearances where I will
continue to make up scientific-sounding reasons for you to keep
complying with government mandates.

Speaking engagements should also be super-helpful when I need to buy a
new yacht or mansion. Hillary Clinton showed how lucrative that
strategy can be.

The really great thing about my retiring now is that when people
eventually find out that the vaccines and masks I pushed so hard are
actually worthless and even harmful, and when people remember that I
funded the coronavirus gain-of-function research in China, I won't be
around to blame.  I'll just use that classic Clintonian excuse:
"Mistakes Were Made".  I can simply blame underlings and pretend I
didn't know what was going on.

So be reassured that I'll still be around to dispense my
Pharma-pfriendly brand of The Science™, and to accept your continued
worship of my awesome awesomeness.

![I represent Science](/images/king-fauci-science.jpg)
