---
title: Quarantine Nostalgia
date: '2024-04-27 07:20:00'
draft: false
tags:
- covid19
---

As I get ready to pack up and leave Virtuous Vermont and head to
CrazyFornia, I like to remember those fun times of 2020, when the
world went ape-shit crazy. I don’t know what it was like in other
states, but here the “rules” said that you if you visited a
neighboring state, you had to quarantine for a week in your home
before you could venture out into the world again. In other words, the
Scary Virus was so bad that the mere act of crossing a state boundary
would propel the Scary Virus into becoming a Sooper-Dooper Scary Virus
of Doom.
<!--more-->

The really amazing thing about this very scientific piece of
The Science™ is that the Scary Virus knew where the state boundaries
were and respected them. If you ventured to within an inch of the
boundary but didn’t cross, you’d be fine. But if you crossed over the
line even a millimeter (that’s smaller than an inch, for those of you
who didn’t take high school physics), then you’d suddenly become a
super-spreader of the Sooper-Dooper Scary Virus of Doom.

If you’ve ever been in the so-called “Upper Valley”, where the cities
of New Hampshire and Vermont get really friendly with each other,
you’d realize the utter absurdity of the quarantine rule. It’s
perfectly normal to buy groceries at the food co-op in White River
Junction (VT), then drive four blocks and cross the Connecticut River
to West Lebanon (NH) to buy gas for the car. But in March 2020, this
perfectly normal behavior was now designated as a dangerous,
quarantine-worthy, super-spreading event.

And speaking of that food co-op in White River Junction: it’s one of
the nicest little groceries around, but they went full-on Covidian
with the masks and one-way stickers, and not allowing shoppers to
bring their own virus-infested bags into the store. Sure, we wasted a
lot of single-use bags, but at least we were safe from that
Sooper-Dooper Scary Virus of Doom. Even as recently as March of this
year, a full four years after the inception of the Great Scamdemic,
the employees of that co-op were back to wearing masks again. I asked
one of the checkers about this, and he said that they were all getting
sick again. It’s heart-warming to know that the Magic Talisman of the
mask still works its magic, reminding us once again of that wonderful
Spring of 2020. 

I also fondly remember all those fancy devices that grocery stores
installed in March 2020 to track the number of people that entered and
exited the stores. These devices kept us all so very safe, as we
shivered outside in the sub-freezing temperatures (March in Vermont is
not like March in Silicon Valley). Somebody probably made a lot of
money on those devices, while shop and cafe owners throughout Vermont
lost their businesses because they were considered “non-essential”
workers. But at least we were safe from that Sooper-Dooper Scary Virus
of Doom. 
