---
title: Backfilling
date: '2012-06-25 13:39:07 +0000'

tags:
- firstday
---

The foundation finally got backfilled last week, during the three day
heat wave where the temperature got up to around 90.  Even though most
of the work was done by the excavator, we still had to do a lot of
exhausting manual labor to lay down various pipes and move crushed
stone around.

Before any of this work could be done, we had a coating specialist
come out and seal the below-grade part of the foundation with a sticky
black rubberized tar substance, on top of which was placed a 2-inch
thick compressed
[fiberglass matting](/gallery/firstday-cottage/P6200729.JPG)
that acts as a drainage board.

Then we laid down the perimeter French drain pipe next to the
foundation footings.  These are four inch wide plastic pipes with
holes on the side facing down.  These pipes go all the way around the
foundation and exit at one runout pipe.  They had to be joined to the
basement floor drain pipe, using a
[rather complicated set of joints](/gallery/firstday-cottage/P6200727.JPG).
We had originally planned to put a second set of French drain pipes on
top of the footings, but drainage board left no room for that.

Then we had to lay down water pipes from the spring. This was tedious
work that involved making a bed of dirt under the easily damaged black
poly pipes, then piling six inches more dirt on top of the pipes to
protect them from the stones that were going to be placed on top of
them.

Finally the excavator could do the first part of his work, adding an
amazing amount of crushed stone (because of the very wet location) up
against the foundation.  On top of this we laid down some filter
fabric, which supposedly prevents silt from running down into the
stone and clogging the French drain pipes.  Then the excavator came
back and finished the job by filling with dirt.  Finally we were able
get to the deck of the first floor without climbing ladders.

There is some controversy, we discovered, about the idea of
backfilling before the decking is in place, which we had originally
wanted to do to make building easier.  But both our foundation
contractor and excavator were opposed to the idea, saying that without
any kind of bracing (such as that provided by the beams plus decking),
the concrete foundation walls could collapse inward.  We went along
with their recommendation, but there was one problem with it, aside
from the inconvenience of having to use ladders for so long: the
decking was now vulnerable to the coating and backfilling operations.
We neglected to tarp the decking for these operations, and as a
result, some stones and black tarry spray landed on the deck, and one
bit of the deck was gouged by the excavator's machinery.  I think (and
FirstDay Cottage recommends this) that a better way to do this job
would have been to brace the foundation, perhaps using cut tree
trunks, and backfill before doing any of the work on the house.  Even
the way we did it, with the backfill happening late, we still had to
use one tree trunk brace at one point, and it wouldn't have been much
more work to make two more braces.
