---
title: First stages of Roofing
date: '2012-08-30 13:13:05 +0000'

tags:
- firstday
---

We've spent the past two weeks working on getting the roof up on the
house.  We started on the two story section.  First, we sheathed the
roof, using the same boards we used to sheath the walls.  These boards
become the high ceilings in the one story section and in the second
floor of the two story section.  We placed the boards so that the
beveled edges face the inside, the opposite of what we did with the
wall sheathing.  We first put up seven rows of sheathing, which gave
us enough support for the first row of foam (which comes in 4 foot
wide sheets), tacked down the Typar housewrap, then nailed down the
foam with the strapping boards on top.

This first part of the roof could be done largely from inside and from
ladders.  But the rest of the roof up to the peak had to be done
mostly with one of us standing on the roof.  My partner did this part
of the work, since she has climbing experience and the necessary
climbing ropes and equipment.  But it was exhausting, hot work for
her, especially since we were still just learning the best ways to do
this part of the job.  We had a third person for a couple of day, and
that helped a lot.  It took us nearly a week to get the foam down on
the two story roof.  The metal roofing hasn't arrived yet, so we
tarped the roof while we're waiting.

This week we have been working on installing the
roof on the one story section.

[![one story roof](/gallery/firstday-cottage/IMG_20120830_083536_hu_4bd5a8705f1feda4.jpg)](/gallery/firstday-cottage/IMG_20120830_083536.jpg)

This has been much easier than the two story section, for several
reasons.  First, we know better what we're doing, and have streamlined
the process a bit (for example, we measure, cut, and start nails in
all the strapping down on the ground).  Secondly, the weather is
cooler and breezier this week.  Thirdly, the one story section is
nearly seven feet shorter then the two story section, so we don't have
to deal with as many of the awkwardly long 13 foot sheathing boards.
And finally, the one story roof is much closer to the ground, so my
partner feels comfortable walking on the roof without a rope, using
the strapping already nailed down from ladders as footholds, and that
saves time.

We should have the foam all in place on the one story section at the
end of today.  Then we'll either start putting the foam on the sides,
or start putting up the metal roofing if it shows up soon.

