---
title: Stairs, windows, and roofing
date: '2012-09-24 11:40:43 +0000'

tags:
- firstday cottage
---

The last three weeks have been pretty busy and we have made quite a
bit of progress.  At first things seemed to go slowly and
frustratingly.  Putting the foam up on the walls and nailing it down
with strapping would seem to be a quick, straightforward job at first
sight.  But with so many windows in this house (35 total) the task
becomes quite tedious, with lots of cutting of foam, test placing,
trimming, replacing, etc.  The worst part is putting up the triangular
pieces.  Sometimes the 3-4-5 triangle rule seems to work, and
sometimes not quite.

So we were a bit discouraged until two weekends ago, when two friends
showed up and helped us install the two pre-fab staircases.

[![pre-fab staircases](/gallery/firstday-cottage/IMG_20121025_074420_hu_6ac5a08004e66475.jpg)](/gallery/firstday-cottage/IMG_20121025_074420.jpg)

Each one weighs 180 pounds, so we were told, and it's not really
possible for two people to lower or lift them into place.  But with
four people it went pretty smoothly.  Fortunately the opening we'd
made between two bays of the house was exactly 36 inches, the width of
the stairs.  Any narrower and we would have had to do some shaving and
sanding.  We had tried to keep the opening a little wider than 36
inches, but somehow wood shrinkage and shifting had narrowed the
opening.  In any case, we now can get up and down the house without
ladders, a huge convenience.

Then we focused on putting in windows where the foam and strapping
were ready.  This is not quite as difficult as it would appear at
first, but we did discover that it's very important to shim the
opening defined by the strapping so that the bottom edge is as level
as possible.  Otherwise the window won't close quite evenly at the top
and bottom.

We were terrified by the prospect of putting up windows on the second
floor, because that would involve pushing the windows into the
openings from outside by two people on ladders.  The bigger windows
are very heavy and the job just seemed too dangerous. We were saved by
our neighbor, the fellow who did the excavation work for the
foundation.  He brought over his excavator machine with a bucket
loader, and raised the bucket up to the second floor.
I stood on the bucket
while people inside passed the window out to me.  This worked amazingly
well, but we got a bit dizzy with success and forgot to level one of
the windows we installed this way, so we'll have to remove and
reinstall that window.

[![bucket window lift](/gallery/firstday-cottage/P9190857_hu_91c9a5df01325547.JPG)](/gallery/firstday-cottage/P9190857.JPG)

We have also started on putting the metal roof up, and finished one
side of the two story section yesterday.  We rented scaffolds
to do this job, because once again, trying to push heavy objects (metal
roofing sheets) up ladders would have been too dangerous.  It really
helps to have a third person on the ground for this job, and we're
extremely grateful for the help we got this last weekend for this.
We're going to make a push to have all the metal up by the end of the
week. 

[![scaffolds](/gallery/firstday-cottage/P9220875_hu_805fd33855287766.JPG)](/gallery/firstday-cottage/P9220875.JPG)

There's still a lot to do after the roofing, and it's clear that we
might not have the house ready to be moved into by winter.  But we
should have the house completely enclosed by the end of the October,
which will allow us to work on the interior with less worry about the
weather.
