---
title: Sheathing
date: '2012-08-03 11:17:10 +0000'

tags:
- firstday cottage
---

We are now more than half way through installing the sheathing
on the two story section.

[![sheathing](/gallery/firstday-cottage/P7300776_hu_c6d9672655dacffa.JPG)](/gallery/firstday-cottage/P7300776.JPG)

The sheathing is made up of 1x8 tongue and
groove pine boards that are nailed to the outside of the posts.  This part is fun
because it goes up quickly, and because it isn't quite as fiddly as
decking.  That's because the joints are going to be hidden under
insulation and siding, so the lengths don't have to be precise.

There are some tricky parts to this step, though.  We make sure the
boards are pulled down when nailing so there aren't any unsightly gaps
visible from inside the house.  We rip the tongues off of boards that
can't be full width (e.g., below window openings).  Also, because the
sheathing becomes the inside walls, we try to choose boards that will
look good from inside.  The wood is knotty pine, and some of the knots
make interesting patterns.  My background as the son of two biologists
causes me to see some of these knots as microscopic creatures like
paramecia or amoebae.

Before the sheathing could be put up, we had to frame the rough
openings for the windows.  This is a pretty straightforward task.  On
the long sides of the house, the openings are made with two 2x4s
toe-nailed between posts.  On the shorts sides, where there are no
posts, it's more work: a frame has to be constructed from a two-board
thick sandwich of vertical and horizontal 2x4s, and the vertical
boards are attached to the beams above and below with nailing plates.
This framing is one of those parts of the construction process that
isn't described clearly in the instruction book, but is easy to
understand once you make a couple of them.
