---
title: Doors
date: '2012-10-23 19:36:50 +0000'

tags:
- firstday
---

Over the last couple of weeks we've installed the four
[exterior doors](/gallery/FirstDay%20Cottage/IMG_20121025_074527.jpg).
There are two doors in the walkout basement wall, and two up on the
main floor.  Now that the wind doesn't blow through the house, it
stays a lot warmer inside, which makes it more pleasant to do interior
work.

The doors were all pre-hung in their frames, which made installation
relatively straightforward, though each one took most of a morning to
install. Briefly, you set the door into the caulked rough opening, put
three shims on each vertical side of the frame to snug it against the
posts, then put screws through the frame and shims and into the posts.
I chose to use screws instead of nails because the door already
included two long screws and instructions for putting them into the
top hinge, and it seemed like a good idea to use screws at the other
attachment points.  The screws are easier to remove if a mistake is
made, and they don't look bad since they are hidden when the door is
closed.

I also found that the doors were perfectly square, with very small
gaps between the door and its frame, so that if the shims were pushed
in too tightly, the door wouldn't close.  It also didn't work to try
to align the door frame with the less perfect rough opening in any
way, because this would also push the frame out of square and cause
problems with closing.

The doors on the main floor required blocking underneath them for
support.  This part isn't clearly shown in the instructions for the
house.  Because the door sticks out about 3.75 inches into the outside
world from the edge of the floor, the bottom of the door needs to be
supported for those 3.75 inches.  I used two pieces of 2x10 sill plate
planks cut to the width of the rough opening, placed flat against the
sheathing, resting on top of the sill plate.  Then I placed a treated
2x4 flat side down on top of the 2x10s.  This made the support level
with the floor, which is also made from 2 inch planks resting on 10
inch beams.  The door sticks out just a little beyond the 2x4, which
provides a kind of drip edge and should prevent water from getting
under the door.  We used plenty of silicone caulking under the doors,
but it seemed best to make sure no water gets under there in the first
place.

These little lessons were just more examples of how much more one
learns from mistakes and experience on the job than from books or
instructions or even videos.
