---
title: FirstDay Cottage under way
date: '2012-05-11 19:49:03 +0000'

tags:
- firstday
---

Last summer we had planned to start building a new [FirstDay
Cottage](http://www.firstdaycottage.com) kit on a rural piece of land
in central Vermont.  The plans were halted by hurricane Irene, which
blew in the day after we were supposed to start digging the
foundation.  The foundation never happened, and by the time the roads
in our part of Vermont were fixed, it was too late to start digging or
building.  So we had to put off the building until this year, after
mud season.

Our cottage is going to be a variant on a T-shaped model that you can
see at the FirstDay web site (linked above).  We wanted it to have a
long window-filled section that faced south, for maximum solar gain in
winter.  You can see the architect's rendition of the south side of
the house in this drawing:

[![south elevation](/gallery/firstday-cottage/south-elevation_hu_37599a0ac5a3e5bb.jpg).](/gallery/firstday-cottage/south-elevation.jpg)

The construction finally started a couple of weeks ago with the
foundation digging.  The foundation is now half done. I'll post
pictures soon.  To save bandwidth for users with slow internet access
(much of Vermont is still on dial-up and miles and years away from
broadband), I won't insert images directly in these postings, but will
provide links to the images.

When people find out we are building a house ourselves, they often
want to impress their opinions and ideas on us with great
forcefulness.  Needless to say, everybody's opinions differ greatly,
and often have very little experience backing them up.  This is the
great danger with building a kit like this, which does not use
conventional stud framing, which means that conventional thinking and
techniques often do not apply.  So we take the advice with grain of
salt, and do lots of research and talking before considering any
ideas.

Then there are the areas not related directly to the kit, and which
have accumulated some quasi-religious beliefs. For example, the
subject of waterproofing the basement (our is a full basement with a
walkout at the downhill, east end) has gotten us some confusing and
contradictory advice.  Sorting through the bewildering array of
information is pretty stressful when you're dealing with the pressure
of hired help.  Once the foundation is out of the way, this will be
less of a problem because we'll be doing the work ourselves: building
the house, which comes with detailed instructions.
