---
title: Radon mitigation
date: '2013-12-16 19:11:43 +0000'

tags:
- firstday cottage
---

Last summer we borrowed a radon tester from a friend and left it in
the basement for a few weeks.  We didn't expect a problem because the
old house, 400 feet away, had pretty low levels of radon in its
basement.  So we were alarmed to see the levels rising to around 18
pCi/L, more than four times higher than the amount the EPA says is its
"[action level](http://www.radon.com/radon/radon_levels.html)".  We
bought our own radon tester and it confirmed the high readings.

Then we moved the tester upstairs and things seemed pretty good all
summer and into the fall: the level was around 2 pCI/L.  But after the
weather got cold and we closed up both the basement windows and the
house windows, the level started rising and eventually reached 7.0
without any sign of slowing down.

So clearly we needed to do something.  Radon mitigation systems
typically cost up to $1500 to install, and consist of a pipe that runs
from under the basement slab to a point outside the house, with the
airflow driven by a fan that is constantly running.  Usually the fan
and much of the pipe are installed inside the house, hidden in attics
or closets or behind walls, with the final length of pipe protruding
through the roof.  But this kind of installation would be difficult
and ugly in a house like ours, with exposed wood everywhere and no
attics or drywall.  The idea of cutting yet another hole in the metal
roof was too daunting, as was the idea of hiring a contractor to do
the work.

So we decided to install the radon system ourselves.  We had already
done plumbing and electrical work on the house, so this new project
didn't seem out of the question.  Fortunately, there's a
[small company](http://www.indoor-air-health-advisor.com/radon.html) that
offers free advice and sells all the parts (aside from the pipe)
needed to install a system.

We already had a hole in the basement slab that was originally meant
for a shower drain, and which went right down to the crushed ledge
gravel under the slab.  This was the perfect place to start the pipe.
We capped off the opening and ran the pipe through the cap,
caulking liberally to avoid leaks. 

[![pipe in basement floor](/gallery/firstday-cottage/IMG_2931_hu_f9b74a7d9186df97.JPG)](/gallery/firstday-cottage/IMG_2931.JPG)

Then the problem was deciding where to run the pipe up the side of the
house.  We wanted the pipe to terminate at least 12 inches above the
roof.  But we didn't want to cut a hole in the roof, which would have
been necessary at the eaves because of the large roof overhang there.
Also, running the pipe up one of the eave sides would subject it to
pressure from snow sliding down the roof.  So running the pipe up a
gable end would fix those problems.  But running the pipe up either of
the two gable ends closest to the hole in the slab would require
boring a 4-1/2 inch hole through a beam, and that seemed too extreme,
as well as potentially unsafe.

The most workable solution was to put the pipe up the gable end of the
one-story section, which has a walkout basement.  This required
installing a 40 foot length of pipe along
the basement ceiling:

[![40 foot length of pipe](/gallery/firstday-cottage/IMG_2932_hu_b7d161de2c9d8b6c.JPG)](/gallery/firstday-cottage/IMG_2932.JPG)

The pipe is sloped slightly downward towards
the slab hole, so that any moisture will tend to head back to the
gravel.  Then the pipe exits the basement
through a hole bored just above the basement door:

[![pipe exits the basement](/gallery/firstday-cottage/IMG_2933_hu_e2bae98c5bc7000.JPG)](/gallery/firstday-cottage/IMG_2933.JPG)

Outside the house sits the fan:

[![fan](/gallery/firstday-cottage/IMG_2935_hu_3a382e5e2feb55a.JPG)](/gallery/firstday-cottage/IMG_2935.JPG)

The fan pulls air from the pipe in the basement and sends it up the
exterior pipe.  The top of the pipe has two 45 degree joints that
allowed us to avoid having to cut a hole in the roof:

[![exterior pipe](/gallery/firstday-cottage/IMG_2934_hu_1706fdd582bde99a.JPG)](/gallery/firstday-cottage/IMG_2934.JPG)

The electrical work was straightforward and simple.

The system definitely works: after about five days of running the fan
continuously, the radon level in the basement dropped to .9 pCI/L.  As
an experiment, we turned off the fan for 12 hours, and the level
climbed back up to 1.4.  So the fan needs to stay on.

This leads to one problem with the system, aside from the electricity
usage: the fan noise.  It's hardly noticeable in the bedroom, at the
opposite side of the house.  But in the dining area, a few feet from
the fan, the noise is a bit annoying.  To help with the noise, we
installed a Leviton RTF01-10Z capacitive ceiling fan control in series
with the fan, and the "high" setting greatly reduces the fan noise and
speed.  But we'll need a week or two of experimentation to know
whether the reduced speed also reduces the system's effectiveness at
removing radon.

*Update*: The ceiling fan control works.  The "high" setting reduces
the airflow to about 1/3 the maximum, according the manometer we
installed on the pipe, and after several days of running the fan at
this speed, the radon level continues to drop slowly.
