---
title: Using the Coce book cover cache with Koha
date: '2018-04-15 18:12:00 +0000'

tags:
- linux
- software
- debian
- koha
---

Earlier I described how I [installed the Koha library software system](/posts/2017-01-18-koha-on-linode/) on Debian 8.
Koha can display book cover images in search results by fetching the images from Amazon,
if you enable the OPACAmazonCoverImages preference in Koha.
But Koha needs to query Amazon to get the URL for the images.  Furthermore, clicking on the
image sends the user to the Amazon site for the book in question. I believe this behavior
is required by Amazon's terms of service, and I consider it incompatible with the goals
of a public library.  To avoid the use of Amazon entirely, and to
speed up the queries for image locations, I installed [Coce](https://github.com/fredericd/coce),
a cover image URL caching server.

<!--more-->

{{< callout type="warning" >}}
In the libraries I support, I have replaced Coce with my own
Crystal implementation of a book cover cache, called [Cover](/fossil/home/marka/fossils/cover/home).
{{< /callout >}}

Log in as root to your Koha server.  Fetch the coce code:

    git clone https://github.com/fredericd/coce

Change to the coce directory and create a config file:

    cp config.json.sample config.json

Edit the resulting `config.json` file.  Remove "aws" from the "providers" line,
and remove the entire "aws" block.  You may also need to change
the first "port" value to something other than 8080 to avoid conflicts
with other services; some Koha installations use 8080 as staff client port.

Edit `coce.js`. Remove the statement starting with "var awsProdAdv",
and remove the entire "CoceFetcher.prototype.aws" function.

Edit `package.json` and remove the "aws-lib" line.

(I have made my own [coce repository](https://gitlab.com/bloovis/coce) that
has these changes.)

Now it's necessary to install redis (key/value database) and nodejs (Javascript server).
The method differs depending on whether you're using Debian 8 or Debian 9.

On Debian 8, install the following packages:

    apt-get install redis-server nodejs node-redis node-express

On Debian 9, it's not quite so simple, because npm (the node package
manager) and node-redis (the node interface to redis) are no longer in
the standard repositories.  Run these commands instead:

    apt-get install curl
    curl -sL https://deb.nodesource.com/setup_10.x | sudo -E bash -
    apt-get install -y nodejs
    npm install express --save
    apt-get install redis-server redis-tools
    npm install redis --save

Start the Coce server:

    nodejs app.js

Configure Koha in the staff client by visiting More / Administration / System Preferences /
Enhanced Content.  Change the "Coce" preference to "Enable".  Change the CoceHost
preference to "http://myhost.com:8080", replacing "myhost.com" with your Koha server's hostname
or IP address (you may need to change 8080 if you changed it earlier in config.json).
Change "CoceProviders" to Google Books and Open Library.  Hit the Save
button.

Test Coce in the OPAC by searching for some books.  Some (most?) of the results should
show cover images, especially if the books are fairly recent.

To make the Coce server start automatically like other services, create the file `/etc/init.d/coce`
with the following contents:

```bash
#! /bin/sh
### BEGIN INIT INFO
# Provides:          coce
# Required-Start:    $syslog $time $remote_fs
# Required-Stop:     $syslog $time $remote_fs
# Default-Start:     2 3 4 5
# Default-Stop:      0 1 6
# Short-Description: Coce
# Description:       Coce book image cover cache
### END INIT INFO
#
# Author:       Mark Alexander <marka@pobox.com>
#

# set -x

PATH=/bin:/usr/bin:/sbin:/usr/sbin

. /lib/lsb/init-functions

case "$1" in
  start)
    log_daemon_msg "Starting Coce"
    if pgrep -f "nodejs app.js" ; then
	log_end_msg 1
    else
	chdir /root/coce
	nodejs app.js &
	log_end_msg $?
    fi
    ;;
  stop)
    log_daemon_msg "Stopping Coce"
    pkill -f "nodejs app.js"
    log_end_msg $?
    ;;
  force-reload|restart)
    $0 stop
    $0 start
    ;;
  status)
    pgrep -f "nodejs app.js"
    ;;
  *)
    echo "Usage: /etc/init.d/coce {start|stop|restart|force-reload|status}"
    exit 1
    ;;
esac

exit 0
```

(Note: the method I used above to stop the Coce server, using pkill, may be dangerous
if there are other processes on your system that were started with an identical
command line.)

Make sure that the init file is executable:

    chmod +x /etc/init.d/coce

Then run this command to set up the Coce service so that `systemd` knows about it:

    update-rc.d coce defaults

Now you should be able to start the service using:

    systemctl start coce

Stop the service using:

    systemctl stop coce

Check the status of the service using:

    systemctl status coce

{{< callout type="info" >}}
*Update*: After using coce for a few months in a live installation,
I found that it occasionally crashes, apparently due to some malformed
html that it receives from books.google.com.  I am not skilled enough
in Javascript to know how to fix this problem, so I used a kludge to
work around the problem: I arranged for coce to be restarted once a day.
As root, I used `crontab -e` to add the following line to the root's crontab:

    0 5  *   *   *     /etc/init.d/coce restart
{{< /callout >}}

{{< callout type="info" >}}
*Update 2*: Today the DNS servers for our Koha host went offline,
causing coce to store empty strings in its Redis cache for book cover
URLs.  This meant that when the DNS problems went away, the affected book cover
images still didn't show in the Koha OPAC.  The fix was to clear the Redis
cache using this command:

    redis-cli flushdb
{{< /callout >}}

{{< callout type="info" >}}
*Update 3*: A better way than a cron job to restart coce after it crashes is to
arrange for systemd to do the job.  I did this by first
creating the directory `/etc/systemd/system/coce.service.d` .
Then I created the file `restart.conf` in that directory, with the following
contents:

    [Service]
    RemainAfterExit=no
    Restart=always
    RestartSec=5s

Finally, I ran the command `systemd daemon-reload`, which told systemd to read
the new configuration.
{{< /callout >}}
