---
title: ThinkPad T450s ethernet and suspend
date: '2020-05-12 18:54:00 +0000'

tags:
- linux
- thinkpad
---

There seems to be a problem with the ethernet device on a ThinkPad T450s (and possibly
other machines using Intel E1000 ethernet devices), where Network Manager (NM) hangs
trying to initialize the device after a suspend/resume cycle.
After a resume, NM shows a spinning icon for about 10 seconds trying to get an IP address, and it
eventually gives up.  Telling NM to try again results in the same failure.

<!--more-->

I observed this problem on Linux Mint 19.1 (Tara), using the 4.15.0-91-generic
kernel from Ubuntu 18.04, and using two different NAT router/ISP installations.

After some searching, I came across a [solution](https://forum.manjaro.org/t/no-ethernet-network-connection-after-resume-very-recent-problem/53197/70)
that uses systemd to disable the ethernet device before suspend, and enable
it after resume.  Unfortunately, there are some typos in the proposed systemd
scripts: a superfluous '[' character, and missing spaces surrounding semicolons
in the command lines.

Below is the modified solution for the problem.  Log in as root to perform all
of these steps, or prefix each command with `sudo`.

Create the file `/etc/systemd/system/network-suspend.service` with the following
contents:

    #/etc/systemd/system/network-suspend.service
    #sudo systemctl enable network-suspend.service
    [Unit]
    Description=Stop network components prior to suspending
    Before=sleep.target

    [Service]
    Type=oneshot
    ExecStart=/bin/systemctl stop NetworkManager.service ; /bin/ip link set enp0s25 down ; /sbin/modprobe -r e1000e

    [Install]
    WantedBy=sleep.target

If you are using a different ethernet device, use the `ifconfig` command to determine
the device name for `ip link`, and the `lspci -v` command to determine the driver name for `modprobe`.

Then make the file executable using:

    chmod +x /etc/systemd/system/network-suspend.service

Similarly, create the file `/etc/systemd/system/network-resume.service` with the following contents:

    #/etc/systemd/system/network-resume.service
    #sudo systemctl enable network-resume.service
    [Unit]
    Description=Start network components after resuming
    After=suspend.target

    [Service]
    Type=oneshot
    ExecStartPre=/bin/sleep 1s
    ExecStart=/sbin/modprobe e1000e ; /bin/sleep 1s ; /bin/ip link set enp0s25 up ; /bin/systemctl start NetworkManager.service

    [Install]
    WantedBy=suspend.target

Make this file executable using:

    chmod +x /etc/systemd/system/network-resume.service

Tell systemd to enable and then load the new service files using:

    systemctl enable network-suspend.service
    systemctl enable network-resume.service
    systemctl daemon-reload

Before seeing if these new services work in a suspend/resume cycle, you can
test them manually.  First, try the suspend service:

    systemctl start network-suspend.service
    systemctl status network-suspend.service

The second command should show any errors that might have occurred.

Similarly, test the resume service using:

    systemctl start network-resume.service
    systemctl status network-resume.service

Now you can test a suspend/resume cycle.  Note that after the resume, there is a two second delay
before Network Manager reports that the ethernet device is connected.
This is due to the two sleep commands in `/etc/systemd/system/network-resume.service`.
It's possible that these delays could be reduced further, but two seconds seems
innocuous.

*Update 2022-12-07*:

The problem described above got much worse in Mint 19.3.  After reading
this [kernel bug description](https://bugzilla.kernel.org/show_bug.cgi?id=205067),
I tried
adding timeouts to the systemctl scripts to give the ethernet device more time to
detect a link,
but nothing worked.  Finally, the only thing that reliably brought back the ethernet
after a resume was to detach the cable, wait five seconds, reattach the cable,
wait two seconds, and then tell Network Manager to reconnect.

Fortunately, the problem seems to have been fixed in Mint 21, which I installed
yesterday.  So far the ethernet has been successfully brought back online after
a half-dozen suspend/resume cycles.  It remains to be seen how reliable this
will be in the future, but so far it's a huge improvement.
