---
title: A Message from the WHO
description: "No, we're not the rock band"
date: '2022-05-15 09:18:00 +0000'

tags:
- covid19
---

Greetings, injection lovers! We at the WHO want you to get to know us better
and learn what we have planned for your future.  No, we're not the rock band
who sang "Meet the new boss, same as the old boss!"  We're the World Health Organization,
and you can tell from our name that we would be *much* better than the old boss,
because we care so much about the health of everybody in the world!

<!--more-->

Now, you may have heard that our Fearless Leader was a bigwig in
an Ethiopian terrorist organization.  But he's totally reformed!
He's a good guy now!  So forget his past and trust what he says.

For years we've been trying to implement a world government of unelected
bureaucrats, under the guise of nice things like "health", and "fairness",
and "sustainability".  You couldn't possibly object to things like that,
could you?

Our real mission is total control of the world's population.  Some of
the things we'd like to do is to get all the countries in the world to
bow down to our every edict.  If we say there's some new deadly
threat, like the Worst Disease Ever from the last two years, we want
everybody to shut down their small businesses, stay at home, do all
their socializing and shopping online, undergo lots of useless medical
testing, and take whatever experimental injections we specify.

Why do we want these great things?  Because we care about you, right?
Ha ha, fooled you!  That's just what we get the media to tell you so
you'll submit to our control.  Our real goal is to make the super-rich
even richer and impoverish the rest of you useless eaters.  Just look
at the last two years, when we scared you with the Worst Disease Ever.
People like our buddies Bill Gates and Jeff Bezos got even richer,
while you had to stay home, lose your jobs and businesses, and cower
in fear.  We had to do this because with the impending collapse of the
financial house of cards, the super-rich were in danger of losing some
of their money.  We couldn't let that happen!  So we needed to shut down a bunch
of the economy, and transfer the bits that we shut down to the super-rich.

The problem with the Worst Disease Ever of the last two years is that
we didn't have all of our ducks in a row.  Some countries did
everything we told them to, but others, like that pesky Sweden,
hardly did anything we wanted.  Plus we didn't have all of the surveillance
infrastructure in place to implement world-wide social control systems,
like vaccine passports.  That's a huge problem, because it
exposes the fact that everything we recommended actually failed, and in
fact made things worse.  We need 100% compliance so that nobody will
know how much better things would be without us.

So now we're working on getting all the countries of the world to sign
on to new agreements with us.  These agreements will, we hope, force
the entire planet to comply with our edicts the next time we scare you
with some new scary threat.  That means no more injection hesitation,
you despicable anti-vaxxers!  You'll be brought under our control via vaccine
passports the next time, and you'll be happy, because you'll be loved and
appreciated by all the friends and relatives who called you a
granny-killing psychopath last year.

So that's our plan for your future.  We know you'll like it, because
we've gotten you to be so terrified that you'll comply with anything
we want you to do in the future.
