---
title: "Tiny House 4: End Walls"
tags:
- tiny house
date: '2025-01-22'
---

I put up the end walls over the last few days, so the framing is done:

<!--more-->

[![South end wall](/gallery/tiny-house/IMG_20250122_134043_613_hu_58d7ce677fdd6a39.jpg)](/gallery/tiny-house/IMG_20250122_134043_613.jpg)

I laid out the end walls on the floor. They’re made from two layers of
2x4s screwed together. Then I lifted them into place and fastened them
to the bents using tie plates. Here are the hand-scribbled design
notes for the end walls:

[![End wall notes](/gallery/tiny-house/notes3_hu_b36dec2220588175.jpg)](/gallery/tiny-house/notes3.jpg)

The far (north) end wall has an opening for a 36x54 window, and the
near (south) end wall has an opening for a 30x80 door. There will be
two more 36x54 windows on the left (west) side wall, and one on the
right (east) side wall. That’s a lot of windows for a tiny house, but
it will provide good natural light. (The house won’t have electricity
although I will probably use battery-powered lanterns.)

One nice thing about a post and beam structure is that you have a lot
of freedom with the placement of windows and doors. That’s because you
don’t have the problem of cutting into the load-bearing parts of the
structure, as you would with a stud frame house with studs 16 inches
apart.

In the picture above you can see the ratchet strap that I used the
keep an end wall from flopping over while I lifted it into place.
Ratchet straps are your best friend when working alone.

The framing for the three windows in the side walls was very simple.
The posts on either side of the window are the load-bearing structure,
so there’s no need for a heavy header above the window.

[![Window opening](/gallery/tiny-house/IMG_20250120_160111_412_hu_2721d99277e8aed1.jpg)](/gallery/tiny-house/IMG_20250120_160111_412.jpg)

The next step is to nail 1x6 tongue and groove sheathing over the
outside of the frame. This will provide the needed stability and
rigidity, and will also provide an attractive interior wall surface
without the need for drywall. (I hate drywall with a passion: the
stuff is heavy, structurally weak, difficult to install, and falls
apart if it gets wet.)

It looks like we’re going to get rain and/or snow this weekend, so I
need to cover the entire structure with tarps. I really don’t want the
wood to get wet, especially the nice tongue and groove pine floor.
When M. and I built our house in Vermont, we were constantly dealing
with the rain and tarps (unlike California, it rains in Vermont in the
summer). On such a large house, the tarps were very difficult to use,
never worked perfectly, and always leaked a little. I’m hoping that I
won’t have those problems with such a tiny structure.
