---
title: "Tiny House 10: Roof, Floor, Trim"
tags:
- tiny house
date: '2025-07-20'
comments: true
---

Progress has been slow, due to numerous trips to the Bay Area for
family duty, and the fact that I keep running out of materials and
have to wait for orders to arrive. But this week I was finally able to
get to a big milestone: the house is finished, except for the shiplap
siding, which has been on backorder for 2.5 months. I will now have to
call the supplier, get my money back, and find another source for the
shiplap.

<!--more-->

The hard job was getting the roofing panels installed. This involved a
lot of climbing up and down a ladder set against the roof at a 45
degree angle:

[![](/gallery/tiny-house/IMG_20250720_180245_966_hu_7380eda123e68189.jpg "east roof")](/gallery/tiny-house/IMG_20250720_180245_966.jpg)

In the middle of the day, the house has no shade, and the temperatures
here have been in the low 90s, so I did this work in the early morning
and late afternoon/early evening.

In Vermont, we called these roof panels “agricultural roofing”. They
have exposed fasteners: metal screws with built-in neoprene washers.
This is a cheaper option than standing seam roofing, which has no
exposed fasteners, but which is usually installed by specialty
contractors.

Supposedly roofing screws will self-drill through the panels, but my
experience in Vermont was that this was a very optimistic and
time-wasting idea. So as we did in Vermont, I pre-drilled the holes in
the panels while they were on the ground, using a story stick to mark
the hole locations.

After the roof panels were up, it was time to install the rake
flashing pieces, which are the drip edges on the gable ends. Each of
these had to be custom-cut with metal shears. The cut edges were sharp
and dangerous, so I folded them over with pliers.

Then the two pieces of ridge cap had to be installed, the second one
being custom-cut again. This involved lots more roof ladder climbing,
which made my old creaky knees a bit painful. This picture of the west
roof and north gable end is a better view of the flashing and ridge
cap:

[![](/gallery/tiny-house/IMG_20250720_180409_951_hu_28baaddb3c81b6ec.jpg "west roof")](/gallery/tiny-house/IMG_20250720_180409_951.jpg)

Then it was time to sand the floor and apply a polyurethane finish. I
did the rough sanding with a random orbital sander, and did the fine
sanding with a hand-held sanding block. Then I put down several coats
of polyurethane. I prefer doing this to using floor paint, because you
can see the wood grain and patterns.

Finally I spray-foamed the gaps around the windows and door, and
installed some custom-cut trim over the gaps. The trim is very simple
and rustic, but the simplicity fits the design of the house. Here’s a
not-so-great picture of three of the windows and the floor on the
north end, where the bed will go:

[![](/gallery/tiny-house/IMG_20250720_180135_352_hu_988ee9eb296febf2.jpg "interior north end")](/gallery/tiny-house/IMG_20250720_180135_352.jpg)

Now it’s off to the Bay Area yet again. Maybe next month I’ll be able
to install the siding and be finished with this project.






