---
title: "Tiny House 3: Posts and Rafters"
tags:
- tiny house
date: '2025-01-18'
comments: true
---

After I finished installing the floor (2x6 tongue and groove pine), I
assembled and installed the five bents (a “bent” is the timber
framer’s term for a post/rafter assembly). Here is what it looks like
now:

<!--more-->

[![Posts and rafters](/gallery/tiny-house/IMG_20250118_160132_553_hu_7360a742e1696860.jpg)](/gallery/tiny-house/IMG_20250118_160132_553.jpg)

As you can see, this is nothing like a stud frame house. The high
ceiling (almost 10 feet at the peak) will make the house feel quite
roomy for its very modest size (floor area 112 square feet).

Assembling and installing the bents took about a week. Each bent is
made up of 15 pieces of wood, most of which have one or more angled
cuts. Here are my scribbled notes about the design; high school math
came in handy:

[![notes 1](/gallery/tiny-house/notes1_hu_5099d281abd3b710.jpg)](/gallery/tiny-house/notes1.jpg)

[![notes 2](/gallery/tiny-house/notes2_hu_bf79b36512406cf6.jpg)](/gallery/tiny-house/notes2.jpg)

Then each bent had to be raised and dropped into its slots in the
floor beam. The assembly was too heavy and cumbersome for me to raise
it in one push on my own. To get around this problem, I attached a
support leg to each side of the bent, and raised the bent onto some
sticks until I could lift it on my own. Then when it got nearly
vertical, I pushed the bent the rest of the way using a giant push
stick that was secured at the bottom with a ratchet strap:

[![Raising bent](/gallery/tiny-house/IMG_20250116_151557_560_hu_4712cd4b7389c952.jpg)](/gallery/tiny-house/IMG_20250116_151557_560.jpg)

I couldn’t use this technique on the fourth bent I assembled, because
I had to leave room on the floor to assemble the fifth one. So I
pushed the fourth one up against another bent, and after the fifth
bent was in place, I walked the fourth one to its place in little
increments, using two taut-line hitches tied to the collar tie to keep
it from flopping too far in either direction:

[![Moving 4th bent](/gallery/tiny-house/IMG_20250118_152247_782_hu_aae357dc98332b51.jpg)](/gallery/tiny-house/IMG_20250118_152247_782.jpg)

The next step is to install the sheathing (1x6 tongue and groove
cedar), which I have to order now, so I’ll be resting for a few days.
