---
title: "Tiny House 9: Insulation, roof prep, and an expensive mistake"
tags:
- tiny house
date: '2025-07-03'
comments: true
---

I haven’t been able to work much on the tiny house due to family
obligations involving frequent trips to the SF Bay Area, and delays on
material deliveries. But I finally received the roofing panels and
some extra strapping yesterday, so I was able to make a little
progress.

<!--more-->

This is the second shipment of roofing panels I’ve received. I got the
first set in January, and thought I had calculated the right length.
But after I finished installing the insulation, I realized I had
neglected to include the thickness of the wall in my calculations. So
I had to order replacement panels that are five inches longer. Maybe I
can use the too-short panels for another project, like a wood shed or
an outhouse.

Here’s what the tiny house look like now, with all the insulation in place:

[![Door](/gallery/tiny-house/IMG_20250702_160049_268_hu_5550eb79d844ecff.jpg)](/gallery/tiny-house/IMG_20250702_160049_268.jpg)

Before I could put on the roofing panels, I needed to do some prep
work. First, I had to get up on the roof and install the missing
screws for the strapping that holds down the roof insulation. A couple
of weeks ago, I was able to do the bottom row of strapping, and the
ends of the upper rows by climbing up a ladder leaning against the
gable ends. But I couldn’t put in the higher, middle screws because I
didn’t have a way to get up on the roof until this week.

The way my partner and I got up on the roof in our Vermont house was
to use two ladders: one leaning against the house, and another one on
the roof held in place by a ladder hook over the roof ridge. Roofing
is an inherently dangerous activity, but at least we were able to spot
each other back then.

Now that I’m working alone, I was determined not to use the two-ladder
system. Fortunately, this house is small enough that I could buy a
long extension ladder and lay it directly on the roof at a 45 degree
angle, anchoring the bottom of the ladder to the ground somehow. In
the picture above you can see how I’ve done this on the hilly side of
the house. I was able to climb up the ladder today and install some of
the missing screws on the strapping. I’ll use this same ladder method
to install the roofing panels.

Another problem that arises from working alone is that the roofing
panels are heavy and awkward (they’re 26 gauge, 36 inches wide and 75
inches long). With another person helping, I could screw down a panel
while the other person held the panel at least until enough screws
were in place that she could let go. I don’t have the luxury of a
helper, so I invented a jig that blocks the bottom of the panel from
sliding down, and holds it at the required position for the overhang.
Here are the two jigs in place:

[![Window](/gallery/tiny-house/IMG_20250702_160258_682_hu_c7140b0663a4b665.jpg)](/gallery/tiny-house/IMG_20250702_160258_682.jpg)

The jigs are screwed temporarily to wall strapping. I did a test
placement of a panel, and it looks like the jigs will hold long enough
for me to place a row of screws at the bottom of the panel.

But before I can do that, I’ll have to install some trim and drip
edges on the gable ends. This involves screwing a 2x4 underneath the
protruding strapping to provide an attachment surface for trim and
drip edge. It’s very hot here now, so I’m putting off this job until
tomorrow morning, or maybe late this evening.
