---
title: "Tiny House 12: It's Done, and Mistakes Were Made Along The way"
tags:
- tiny house
date: '2025-08-16'
comments: true
---

I installed the last piece of siding yesterday evening, and hemmed the
last two curtains this morning, so I think the tiny house is done. The
area around it looks like the typical construction site disaster zone,
but I started to clean that up this morning, too.

<!--more-->

The siding was a long, tedious, and tiring job, as I expected. The
temperatures were up in the mid-90s for about week during this period,
and that didn’t help. But mainly it was the constant fiddly work that
wore me out. Before I could cut each piece, I would measure the space
it was going in, and sometimes that would involve climbing the ladder.
Then cut the piece. Then test-place it to make sure it would fit (more
ladder climbing). Then sometimes re-cut the piece and test-fit it
again (more ladder climbing). Then paint the newly cut edge(s). Then
screw it into place (more ladder climbing); this always took a while
because I’d pre-drill each hole to prevent splitting. Anyway, after a
week, I was so exhausted in the evenings I was often near tears.

Then about halfway through the siding, I was almost out of paint. I
was using some Kelly-Moore paint left by the previous owner for doing
the main cabin in 2020/2021. I saw that the color formula was on the
side of the can, so I said to myself, I’ll just go to Kelly-Moore and
get an exact match, no problem! Then I discovered that the company
went out of business last year. So I got a local hardware store to do
a match, and they did such a good job that I can barely tell the
difference. But to make the switch less obvious, I stopped using the
old paint after the second wall, and used the new paint on the third
and fourth walls.

At one point I was so sick of siding, I decided to take a break and
build some stairs to make it easier to get into the house, the floor
of which is about 21 inches above ground level. Here’s a picture of
the finished siding and stairs on the south end:

[![](/gallery/tiny-house/IMG_20250816_110413_452_hu_fda3dd53753feb59.jpg "Siding and stairs on south end")](/gallery/tiny-house/IMG_20250816_110413_452.jpg)

Working on the curtains was more fun. They were 98 inches long, so I
had to cut and hem them for the 54 inch windows. I had used the sewing
machine back in 2021 to make some backpacking equipment, but I had
forgotten some important details about threading the thing. It’s
amazing what a jam a sewing machine makes, and how quickly, when you
screw up this part. I finally had to RTFM to figure out what I did
wrong.

There’s no good place to set up a sewing machine in the main cabin, so
I did the work on the built-in laptop desk in the tiny house:

[![](/gallery/tiny-house/IMG_20250816_110451_025_hu_4fef4f0f06928781.jpg "Sewing machine on laptop desk")](/gallery/tiny-house/IMG_20250816_110451_025.jpg)

The curtains look nice and keep the sun out during the rather brutal
summer afternoons here, but still let in some light:

[![](/gallery/tiny-house/IMG_20250816_110559_726_hu_8f4f6ef4ad8ca140.jpg "Curtain and dictionary stand")](/gallery/tiny-house/IMG_20250816_110559_726.jpg)

I made a bunch of mistakes during the build process, and maybe learned
a little too.

The biggest and most expensive mistake was ordering the wrong size for
the roofing panels. I had done the math correctly on my little
drawings (this is why high school trigonometry is the most useful math
class I ever took). But I had forgotten to take into account the
thickness of the walls and roof insulation. So I had to order a second
set of panels that were five inches longer. I’ll use the “wrong”
panels for other things, like an outhouse or a woodshed.

I also underestimated a lot of the other materials I needed,
especially the flooring, sheathing, siding, and strapping. I am one of
the seven people in California who do not own a gigantic pickup truck,
so I had these materials delivered. Before ordering I had tried to
estimate what I’d need based on square footage plus waste, but somehow
I still got things wrong. Then I’d have to go buy the extra stuff and
fit it into my little hatchback car so I wouldn’t have to pay delivery
fees. I was able to get up to twelve 8-foot boards into the car, with
eight resting on the dash, and four sticking out the passenger window.
But I had to cut a 16 foot floor board in half to get it to fit, so
there’s one place in the floor where there’s a joint.

Amazingly, I got the number of rigid foam pieces exactly right. Maybe
this is because they are big (4x8) and I had drawn out a cutting and
placing diagram before ordering.

On the whole, despite the exhaustion, I’m happy with the project and
love the space I created. I had originally built this thing so that my
friend Joan from Vermont would have a place to stay when she visited,
but after her cancer diagnosis in mid-2024, it was a race against
time: getting the thing built before she was too sick to travel. I
didn’t even start the project until January because I was uncertain
about the site and design, and then the rain and snow slowed things
down. In the end, Joan’s cancer won the race in April. At least I now
have a place for guests to stay, and even if that never happens, I am
content using the place as my summer bedroom.
