---
title: "Tiny House 8: Door and Window"
date: '2025-06-17'
---

The door showed up yesterday, so I spent much of today installing it.
<!--more-->

Doors take a lot of fiddly work. The rough opening is always, um,
rough, so you have to put shims around the door to wedge it tightly in
place. Instead of buying shim wedges at the hardware store, I
custom-made each one on the chop saw by cutting slices off the end of
a 2x4. Also, because I was working alone, I used various jigs to hold
the door so it wouldn’t move or fall out of the opening while I was
screwing it into place. You can see three of these jigs on the outside
of the door in this picture; I had similar jigs inside the door:

[![Door](/gallery/tiny-house/IMG_20250617_163129_135_hu_1d8f421712f8eba2.jpg)](/gallery/tiny-house/IMG_20250617_163129_135.jpg)

You can’t see it in the picture, but there is a strip of flashing
membrane tape between the bottom of the door and the floor. I decided
to use the membrane instead of the three beads of caulking that the
door instructions recommended, because that would seem to provide more
complete protection for the floor.

The next step is to spray-foam the gaps around the door. On the inside
of the door, those gaps will be hidden by trim boards. On the outside,
siding will cover the gaps.

Way back in January, I ordered the first of four windows, and it sat
around all winter waiting for me to finish the house enough to install
it. I didn’t order the other three windows then, because I wanted to
be really sure they would work. This is the kind of uncertainty I’ve
been dealing with, assembling all the materials myself instead of
having FirstDay Cottage deliver them to me. Anyway, I installed the
window on the north gable end of the house, and it does work:

[![Window](/gallery/tiny-house/IMG_20250617_163151_388_hu_c30a731857b5a9b6.jpg)](/gallery/tiny-house/IMG_20250617_163151_388.jpg)

The rough opening was slightly out of level, so I put a little shim
under the right side of the window before installing the roofing nails
through the flange holes.

You can see the strip of flashing membrane tape that I put under the
bottom flange. Eventually I’ll put membrane tape over the side
flanges, and then over the top flange. But my experience with building
the Vermont house told me to wait until just before putting up the
siding to do this. Otherwise, the tape is likely to come loose because
it’s not very sticky against rough wood.

So I ordered the rest of the windows and am waiting for them to show
up. I’ll probably wait until after the roofing is done to install
them. I felt it was safe to install the first window on the north
gable end because I won’t be doing much ladder work there for the roof
job.
