---
title: "Tiny House 1: The Building Bug Bites Again"
tags:
- tiny house
date: '2025-01-09'
---

The little cabin I bought last May is too small to host guests. The
only possible space that could have been used for that purpose is
taken up by a seven-foot grand piano. You gotta have priorities.
<!--more-->

After I moved in, I set up a big old-fashioned canvas tent on the deck
to serve as a guest house. It had a double bed on a platform, a small
table, and a couple of chairs. I had no visitors, but I slept in the
tent myself on the warm nights. The problem with the tent is that it
can’t stay up in the rainy season, and I had to put the tent and all
its furniture away in October.

So I decided to build a tiny (8x14) guest house to serve as a more
comfortable and permanent version of the tent. By making it under 120
square feet, and not installing any electrical or plumbing utilities,
I could build it without a permit.

Even though the tiny house isn’t technically a habitable structure,
there’s an electrical outlet, a water line, and a septic drain a few
feet away. So the potential is there for building an outdoor bath
facility and bringing an extension cord into the house.

The design of the tiny house is a scaled-down version of the one story
section of the house that M. and I built in 2012; you can see
pictures of that house [here](/gallery/firstday-cottage/). It’s essentially a
modernized post-and-beam structure, where the posts, beams, and
rafters are made from conventional 2x lumber sandwiched together. When
M. and I built that house, we were in our mid 50s and had a lot of
energy. I’m almost 70, and working solo, so it’s a good thing this
project is so much smaller.

Before the Christmas rainy spell, I built the foundation and the floor
beams. There’s not much to see yet:

[![Foundation and floor beams](/gallery/tiny-house/IMG_20250109_104102_267_hu_843f1b2216d295d1.jpg)](/gallery/tiny-house/IMG_20250109_104102_267.jpg)
