---
title: Visitors
date: '2019-08-24 04:54:00 +0000'

tags:
- verbal abuse
- double standard
---

I've observed a double standard in this relationship around visitors:
when I have friends visiting (a very rare occurrence),
my partner seems to feel threatened, abandoned, and jealous -- or at least that's my
judgment, based on her dealings with me after the visit.  But when her
friends visit, or we visit her friends, she leaves me alone for long periods
and thinks nothing of it.  Here are couple of incidents that illustrate this
pattern.

<!--more-->

Three years ago, a close friend and her husband flew across the country to stay
with us for a couple of days.  This friend and I were very close for a number
of years before she met her husband; our relationship was like a partnership,
but without the romance and sex part.  We worked together at three different
companies, spent many of our days together, went on camping vacations together,
and much more.

When she and her husband stayed with us, I tried my best to be a good
host and pay attention to them, and they helped me prepare for a
potluck party and bonfire that coincided with their visit.  At one
point her husband and I drove off together to get some beverages from
the nearest grocery store, about eight miles away.  I neglected to
tell my wife about this trip beforehand, and when we returned, she got
very upset and angry with me, saying I should never have left without
saying anything.

The double standard here has to do with informing the other person
about one's whereabouts: apparently I must always let her know
whenever I leave the house, even to go water plants in a greenhouse,
but she doesn't need to abide by this rule.  I have numerous incidents
illustrating this pattern that I can write about later.

There was another angry outburst during this visit, having to do with
restaurant meals, that I can also write about later.

After my friends returned home a couple of days later, my wife continued her
anger and criticism, saying that she had felt abandoned and alone during the
visit, that she thought I was still in love with my former best friend,
and so forth.  I tried to explain that I had simply tried to be a good host,
and I apologized for leaving the house without saying anything. Inside, though,
I was thinking: it had felt good to actually exert some autonomy when I took
the initiative to go buy beverages; I guess I can't really have autonomy after
all, or at least not without causing a huge upset.

The upset lasted for months afterwards, and was made worse when I
decided against going to a party some of her friends were putting on a
couple of days after my friends had left.  After I caved in and
decided to go the party after all, she continued with the
angry treatment of me: she performed dangerous braking maneuvers on
the drive to the party, apparently to scare me; and at the party she
walked away when I asked to have a talk about what was upsetting her.
The silent angry treatment continued for months afterwards, the only
information being imparted to me was the implication that I was
somehow to blame for everything, and that I must apologize in some
unspecified manner (my repeated apology attempts having failed to
solve the problem).  One day, in mid December, I tried (but failed) to
leave for a 30-day separation; more about that later.

The same pattern occurred the next year, after my youngest son and his girlfriend visited
for a few days.  Afterwards I was subjected to another blast of anger about
abandonment, even though I had tried much harder this time to assuage
my wife's insecurity and pay her more attention during the visit.

Now to illustrate the other side of this double standard about
visitors: earlier this week we spent a day and night at the seaside
cottage of some friends of my wife's.  This mini-vacation was actually
fun and stress-free, and I attribute this to the fact that we were
visiting *her* friends and not mine, and the fact the she paid
attention to these friends much of the time.  Because I wasn't the
sole provider of her amusement and entertainment during this
mini-vacation, the pressure was off, and I was free to have some quiet
time to myself for napping and reading while she went off with her
friends. 

The double standard here is pretty obvious: when I have visitors, I must
pay much more attention to my wife than I do to my visitors, but when she
has visitors, it's perfectly OK for her to leave me alone for hours at a time.
The funny thing about this is that I actually *enjoy* being left alone
for long periods, but apparently she feels abandoned with I'm gone for 
more than a few minutes.

I'm not sure if there is anything I can do about this situation, but it
leaves me feeling trapped and controlled.
