---
title: Threats
date: '2019-06-13 12:34:00 +0000'

tags:
- verbal_abuse
- threats
---

I've received a number of threats over the course of this relationships,
ranging from emotional manipulation to physical threats.  What follows
is a partial list along with some context as way of explanation.

<!--more-->

### Physical threats

These are, for the most part, not direct threats against my person, but threats to my belongings
or my physical freedom.

*If you leave, I'll smash your piano with a sledgehammer*.  (Not quite
the exact wording, but it's the essence of the message.)  This one
occurred during the [book-throwing incident](/abuse/2019-05-31-book-throwing-incident/).
This one was quite frightening, because it sounded serious.  It told me that
I would need to find a way to get the piano out of the house *before* any attempt
to leave the relationship.

*You wanna see violence?  This is what it looks like!*  This also occurred
during that book-throwing incident, and was said with her fists just inches
from my face.  Later she said she was just trying to show me what physical
abuse would have looked like in her childhood family, but I don't quite believe
that backpedaling excuse.  During the moment, it was pretty frightening, especially
given a story she told me about how she, as a teenager, beat up her mother with her fists to get
her mother to stop *her* abuse.

*If you walk out now, I'll lock the doors and not let you back in*.  This also occurred
during the book-throwing incident.  A week or so later, I made copies of the house keys
and stashed them in a safe place.  I took this a physical threat because
it impinged on my freedom of movement.

*If you walk out now, I'll leave and not come back*.  This occurred during
a recent "argument" while I was attempting to leave the house to buy some food
for my rather sick partner (more about this another time).  It's a source of
wry amusement to me that the threatened consequence is the opposite of the preceding one.

### Emotional threats

These are threats that attempt to bend my will to hers using emotional manipulation.  I doubt
that they were consciously designed to be manipulative. More likely, they
are indirect cries for help from someone who is afraid of abandonment.  That
still doesn't make them less abusive, and as you will see, they were very effective
in some cases.

*If you leave, I'll kill myself*.  This occurred during a phone
conversation a year and half ago, when I called from my volunteer
workplace to say that I was leaving for a 30-day period.  (Later I
will have much more to say about this incident and the reasons behind
it.) The conversation went on for hours, and in the end I came back
home and promised not to leave.  I know I'm a weak person for allowing
myself to be manipulated this way, but based on what I had learned about
my partner very early in our relationship, I took the threat seriously
and could not bear the thought of her carrying it out.

*I'm going to find someone else to have sex with*.  This is related
to my earlier post about [sex and shame](/abuse/2019-06-10-sex-and-shame/).

*I'm going to sleep upstairs until you apologize properly*.  Again,
this is not the exact wording, but the message was clear.  It has occurred
during several "arguments", including the book-throwing incident.

*How can you think of breaking our marriage vows?* Apparently, this means
that no matter how bad things are for me, despite all my failed efforts
to be understood, I'm supposed to stick around and endure.

*I can't be with someone who's afraid of me.* I've heard this several times.
Apparently I'm not supposed to cringe in fear when she yells at me or throws
things.  Yet if I try to stand up for myself politely (my typical response
is "Please stop yelling") I get subjected to more angry blasts.  Maybe she
is expecting me to apologize in a convincingly heartfelt manner, which
is difficult when I'm fearing for my safety.  If I weren't so weak,
I would take this threat seriously and leave when it is used against me.
